---
title: A Fibbonacci Power Series
---

<p>
This article follows 
<a href="https://projecteuler.net/problem=137" target="blank">question 137</a>  and 
<a href="https://projecteuler.net/problem=140" target="blank">question 140</a>  from Project Euler.
</p>

<p>
First, let us recall the definition of the Fibonacci numbers. We start with:
</p>

<p>$$
F_0=0,\quad F_1= 1
$$</p>

<p>
and define further numbers by the relation:
</p>

<p>$$
F_n=F_{n-1} + F_{n-2}
$$</p>

<p>
This gives us the first few terms:
</p>

<p>$$
0,\;1,\;1,\;2,\;3,\;5,\;8,\;13,\;21,\;34,\;55,\;89,\;144,\; \ldots
$$</p>

<p>
(Please note that Project Euler omits the first index, but this will not change our calculations in any meaningful way, and I will try to be as explicit as possible about this.)
</p>

<p>
The natural generalization is to consider a different starting point. I will write 
</p>

<p>$$
G(a, b, n) = G(a, b, n-1) + G(a, b, n-2)
$$</p>

<p>
given the starting point:
</p>

<p>$$
G(a, b, 0) = a,\quad G(a, b, 1) = b
$$</p>

<p>
and when we are working with a set $a$ and $b$ I will simply write $G_n$. You can see that $G(0, 1 , n)$ gives the Fibonacci numbers themselves.
</p>

<p>
These two Project Euler questions are concerned with the power series with coefficients given by the above sequences. That is, we are interested in the value of the summations:
</p>

<p>$$
\sum_{k=1}^\infty G(a, b, k) x^k = G(a, b, 1)x + G(a, b, 2)x^2 + G(a, b, 3)x^3 + \dots
$$</p>

<p>
Again, if we take $a=0$ and $b=1$, we will have the Fibbonacci numbers:
</p>

<p>
\begin{align*}
\sum_{k=1}^\infty G(0, 1, k) x^k &= F_1x + F_2x^2 + F_3x^3 + \dots \\
					  & = x + x^2 + 2x^3 + 3x^4 +5x^5 \dots
\end{align*}
</p>

<div class='heading'>A Generating Function</div><hr/>

<p>
Interestingly, it is not too difficult to derive a closed-form solution to these series. Let us fix $G_0 = a$ and $G_1 = b$. Then the power series is:
</p>

<p>
\begin{align*}
\sum_{k=0}^\infty G_k x^k = G_0 + G_1 x + G_2 x^2 + \dots
\end{align*}
</p>

<p>
Please note that I have included the initial term $G_0$ that Project Euler omits. We can correct for this at the end by simply subtracting this term.
</p>

<p>
First, I will pull out the first two given terms from the series:
</p>

<p>
\begin{align*}
\sum_{k=0}^\infty G_k x^k = G_0 + G_1x + \sum_{k=2}^\infty G_k x^k
\end{align*}
</p>

<p>
Now I can Replace $G_k$  with the relation that defines it, and split apart the summation further:
</p>

<p>
\begin{align*}
\sum_{k=0}^\infty G_k x^k &= G_0 + G_1x + \sum_{k=2}^\infty (G_{k-1} + G_{k-2}) x^k \\
				   &= G_0 + G_1x +  \sum_{k=2}^\infty G_{k-1} x^k + \sum_{k=2}^\infty G_{k-2} x^k
\end{align*}
</p>

<p>
Next, I notice that multiplying my original series by $x$ and $x^2$ gives:
</p>

<p>
\begin{align*}
x\sum_{k=0}^\infty G_k x^k &= G_0x + G_1 x^2 + G_2 x^3 + \dots\\
x^2\sum_{k=0}^\infty G_k x^k &= G_0x^2 + G_1 x^3 + G_2 x^4 + \dots
\end{align*}
</p>

<p>
Substituting these into the above equation I have:
</p>

<p>
\begin{align*}
\sum_{k=0}^\infty G_k x^k &= G_0 + G_1 x + x\sum_{k=0}^\infty G_k x^k - G_0 x + x^2\sum_{k=0}^\infty G_k x^k
\end{align*}
</p>

<p>
Denoting the original summation as $s(x)$ this is:
</p>

<p>$$
s(x) =  G_0 + G_1 x + xs(x) - G_0 x + x^2 s(x)
$$ </p>

<p>
and solving gives:
</p>

<p>$$
s(x) = \dfrac{G_0 - G_0 x + G_1 x}{1 - x - x^2}
$$</p>

<p>
Remember that this includes our first term. So we have:

<p>$$
\sum_{k=0}^\infty G_k x^k = G_0 + G_1 x + G_2 x^2 + \dots =  \dfrac{G_0 - G_0 x + G_1 x}{1 - x - x^2}
$$</p>

<p>
For the Fibbonacci series we set $G_0 = 0$ and $G_1 = 1$ giving:
</p>

<p>$$
\sum_{k=0}^\infty F_k x^k = F_0 + F_1 x + F_2 x^2 + \dots =  \dfrac{x}{1 - x - x^2}
$$</p>

<div class='heading'>Rational Points that Give Integer Solutions</div><hr/>

<p>
The next question under consideration is which rational values of x give an integer value for our power series. I will write:
</p>

<p>$$
s(x) = \sum_{k=1}^\infty G_k x^k = G_0 + G_1 x + G_2 x^2
$$</p>

<p>
Above we had the equation:
</p>

<p>$$
s(x) =  G_0 + G_1 x + xs(x) - G_0 x + x^2 s(x)
$$ </p>

<p>
which solving for x using the quadratic formula gives us:
</p>

<p>$$
x = \dfrac{-(G_1 - G_0 + s) + \sqrt{(G_1 - G_0 + s)^2 - 4s(G_0-s)}}{2s}
$$</p>

<p>
Note that we have two choices for roots, but one is outside the radius of convergence for the power series.
</p>

<p>
Remember that we included the term $G_0$. If we would like to correct for this, we can make the transformation $s \rightarrow S$ where:
</p>

<p>
\begin{align*}
S(x)&= \sum_{k=1}^\infty G_k x^k \\
       &= \sum_{k=0}^\infty G_k x^k - G_0\\
       &= s(x) - G_0
\end{align*}
</p>

<p>
which gives instead:
</p>

<p>$$
x = \dfrac{-(G_1 + S) + \sqrt{(G_1 + S)^2 - 4(S + G_0)(-S)}}{2(S + G_0)}
$$</p>

<p>
Using the second equation and taking $G_0 = 0$ and $G_1 = 1$ to give the Fibbonacci power series, we have have the following values:
</p>

<p>
\begin{align*}
S\left(\sqrt{2} -1\right) &= 1\\
S\left(\dfrac{1}{2}\right) &= 2\\
S\left(\dfrac{\sqrt{13} - 2}{3}\right) &= 3\\
S\left(\dfrac{\sqrt{89} - 5}{8}\right) &= 4\\
\vdots
\end{align*}
</p>

<p>
We can see for instance that $S = 2$ has the desired property that $x$ is rational. What conditions must be met for this? First, look at our equation for x where we substitute the particular values for $G_0$ and $G_1$:
</p>

<p>$$
x = \dfrac{-(1 + S) + \sqrt{(1 + S)^2 - (2S)^2}}{2S}
$$</p>

<p>
This will be rational exactly when the discriminant $(1 + S)^2 - (2S)^2$ is a perfect square (The following arguement is directly from this <a href="../static/article_files/fib_power/Reference.pdf" target="blank">article</a>)
</p>

<p>
Since the discriminant is itself a difference of two squares, we can consider them as Pythagorean triples so that for integers m, n:
</p>

<p>$$
S + 1 = m^2 - n^2,\quad 2S = 2mn
$$</p>

<p>
This gives the equation:
</p>

<p>$$
m^2 - n^2 = mn + 1
$$</p>

<p>
which can be written as
</p>

<p>$$
(2m-n)^2 = 4 + 5n^2
$$</p>

<p>
We need $4 + 5n^2$ to be a perfect square to ensure a rational x. Unexpectedly, using $n = F_{2j}$ (where j is a positive integer) ensures this is satisfied:
</p>

<p>
\begin{align*}
4 + 5n^2 &= 4 + 5F_{2j} = 4 + 5 \left( \frac{(\varphi^{2j}-\psi^{2j})^2}{5} \right)\\
                &= 4 + \varphi^{4j} - 2(\varphi\psi)^{2j} + \psi^{4j}\\
                &= \varphi^{4j} + 2 + \psi^{4j}\\
	     &=   \varphi^{4j} + 2 (\varphi\psi)^{2j}+ \psi^{4j}\\
	     &= (\varphi^{2j} + \psi^{2j})^2
\end{align*}
</p>

<p>
where I have used the <a href="https://mathworld.wolfram.com/BinetsFibonacciNumberFormula.html" target="blank">Binet formula</a> in the first line. 
</p>

<p>
Furthermore, substituing into the equation $(2m-n)^2 = 4 + 5n^2$  above gives:
</p>

<p>
\begin{align*}
m &= \dfrac{1}{2} (\varphi^{2j} + \psi^{2j} + F_{2j})\\
    &= \dfrac{1}{2} \left( \varphi^{2j} + \psi^{2j} + \frac{\varphi^{2j}-\psi^{2j}}{\sqrt{5}} \right)\\
    &= \dfrac{\varphi\varphi^{2j} - \psi\psi^{2j}}{\sqrt5} = \dfrac{\varphi^{2j+1} - \psi^{2j+1}}{\sqrt5}\\
    &= F_{2j+1}
\end{align*}
</p>

<p>
Finally, substituting this back into the original series gives:
</p>

<p>$$
\sum_{k=1}^\infty F_k (F_{2j}/F_{2j+1})^k = F_{2j}F_{2j+1}, \quad j \geq 1
$$</p>

<p>
What an unexpected result! That we could consider successive coefficients in identifying these rational points is certainly not intuitive. We see that these numbers also grow very quickly:
</p>

<p>
\begin{align*}
F_{2j}F_{2j+1}, n \in \mathbb{Z}^+= \{2, &15, 104, 714, 4895, 33552, 229970, 1576239, 10803704, 74049690,\\
					          &  507544127, 3478759200, 23843770274, 163427632719, 1120149658760, \dots\}
\end{align*}
</p>

<p>
The last number in this list is the solution to problem 137. Problem 140 considers the initialization $G_0 = 3$ and $G_1 = 1$, which give a more complicated sort of equation that determines the rational points. Still, they can be written entirely in terms of the Fibonacci series.
</p>


<div class='heading'>Haskell implementation</div><hr/>

<p>
Interestingly, the scale of the solutions makes checking finding rational solutions non-trivial in terms of computational time. My strategy was to find the first solutions, identify a general pattern, then find the remaining solutions.
</p>

<p>
Haskell makes it quite easy to define functions that themselves return functions, allowing us to build general solutions.

<p>
I define a function that returns a discriminant function for a particular generalized Fibonacci power series:
</p>

<p>
<code>
<pre class = "prettyprint">
import Math.NumberTheory.Powers.Squares
import Data.Ratio
import Data.Sort

discriminant_check :: Int -> Int -> (Int -> Int)
discriminant_check a b = f where
                         f s = s^2 + 2*s*b + b^2 + 4*s^2 + 4*a*s
</pre>
</code>
</p>


<p>
On my desktop I can retrieve the first seven rational solutions within a reasonable amount of time using the following:
</p>

<p>
<code>
<pre class = "prettyprint">
let discriminant_fib = discriminant_check 0 1
let partial_nuggets = take 7 $ filter (\x -> isSquare (discriminant_fib x)) [1..]
</pre>
</code>
</p>

<p>
For more solutions in a timely manner I first need the generating function:
</p>

<p>
<code>
<pre class = "prettyprint">
generator_func :: Ratio Integer -> Ratio Integer -> (Ratio Integer -> Ratio Integer)
generator_func a b = f where
               f x = (a - a*x + b*x)/(1-x-x^2) - a
</pre>
</code>
</p>

<p>
I also need the sequence itself:
</p>

<p>
<code>
<pre class = "prettyprint">
gen_fib :: Int -> Int -> [Int]
gen_fib a b = seq where
              seq = a : b : zipWith (+) seq (tail seq)
              
fib = gen_fib 0 1
</pre>
</code>
</p>

<p>
and can then generate the solutions:
</p>

<p>
<code>
<pre class = "prettyprint">
let fib_generator = generator_func 0 1
let fib_nugget_2 = take 15 $
                   filter (>0) $
                   map (fib_generator) $ 
                   zipWith (%) (map (toInteger) [j | (i, j) <- zip [2..] fib, even i]) 
                               (map (toInteger) [j | (i, j) <- zip [2..] fib, odd i])
</pre>
</code>
</p>

<p>
I can equivalently just use the relation that we showed above:
</p>

<p>
<code>
<pre class = "prettyprint">
let fib_nugget = take 15 $ 
                 filter (>0) $ 
                 zipWith (*) [j | (i, j) <- zip [1..] fib, even i] 
                             [j | (i, j) <- zip [1..] fib, odd i]
</pre>
</code>
</p>

<p>
The solution for problem 140 is very similar, but exploits a different pattern in the rational solutions which utilizes different sequences:
</p>

<p>
<code>
<pre class = "prettyprint">
let gen = gen_fib 3 1

let discriminant_gen = discriminant_check 3 1
let partial_nuggets_gen = take 15 $ filter (\x -> isSquare (discriminant_gen x)) [1..]

let gen_func = generator_func 3 1

let g_nug = map (gen_func) $
            zipWith (%) (filter (>0) $ map (toInteger) [j | (i, j) <- zip [1..] (gen_fib 2 5), odd i]) 
                        (filter (>0) $ map (toInteger) [j | (i, j) <- zip [1..] (gen_fib 2 5), even i])

let f_nug = map (gen_func) $
            [j | (i, j) <- zip [1..] (zipWith (%) (map (toInteger) (gen_fib 1 2)) 
                                                  (map (toInteger) (gen_fib 2 3))), odd i]
            
let nug = take 30 $ merge g_nug f_nug
</pre>
</code>
</p>

<p>
The full code with comments is availible <a href="https://github.com/chenson2018/website-code/blob/master/A%20Fibbonacci%20Power%20Series/general_fibbonacci.hs" target="blank">here</a>.
</p>
