---
title: How Twitter Shaped My Life
tags: Other
---

[//]: # <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script> 
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script> 

This post is a bit of a departure from my usual technical content. Recently I
found myself in the replies of a tweet from Visakan Veerasamy[^visa], once again
discussing how influential Twitter has been for me. I received this reply
that surprised me a bit:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet lds-dual-ring" data-theme="dark">
  <a href="https://twitter.com/DefenderOfBasic/status/1860830335149150375"></a> 
</blockquote>

[^visa]: Visa ([@visakanv](https://twitter.com/visakanv) on Twitter) is one of
    the most interesting people I follow. He has a keen ability for discussing
    human behavior and emotions in a way that almost always resonates with me.
    Go check him out!

My initial thought was something along the lines of "is this really exceptional
or interesting enough to deserve a blog post"? It's pretty common that people
find jobs, community, and even love on Twitter, right? I'm probably not enough
of an outlier to warrant discussing at length. But then I decided to shift my
perspective a bit. How many times have I given advice to a student to go be
active on Twitter? In contrast, how many times have people that I know ***in
real life*** been surprised to hear how important I consider Twitter to be for
my professional growth? I realized pretty quickly that within the circle of
people that I know in the flesh, I am probably the only one with this
relationship to Twitter, so I decided to take up this reply and write a bit
about my experience[^irony].

[^irony]: The irony that this will most likely be seen by Twitter users is not
    lost on me. 

I first made a Twitter account in college (ten years ago now!) but only started
seriously using it in a professionally relevant way when I started my masters
program back in 2019. The first point that seems obvious to a certain flavor of
Twitter user but perhaps not to those outside is that nearly every mildly
technical niche and research area has a highly active corner of Twitter. For the
longest time, when I would open Twitter, the only posts that I would see were
from math professors and programmers. They share their latest research papers,
what languages they're experimenting with, what math puzzles are currently on
their mind. It may seem redundant to describe in today's world, but even online
I've never had another place where I could have near instant access, response,
and alignment with such technical people. Even at universities, there is a
social dynamic that can create distance. This doesn't exist online, and there is
simply a wider net to cast in terms of finding someone that lies within a niche
that interests you.

So now that the stage is set a bit, let's fast forward to the summer of 2020. I
had just finished my masters degree in business analytics at UT Austin. By all
accounts I had a successful year, my classmates had even selected me for the
annual academic excellence award and then... the pandemic hit and suddenly I
found myself in a much rougher job market. I was quickly burning through the
small amount of money I had left, and had no idea what was next. That was
actually how this website started, with the first blog post being about a week
after my graduation! With the benefit of hindsight, I can see how valuable this
time was. It gave me a small breather to decompress, to collect my thoughts both
personally and technically[^regression] after a stressful year. During this time
was when I made my first inroads into functional programming, and started my
slow march towards programming languages research. 

[^regression]: As an example, I wrote this long article [What is
    Regression?](https://chrishenson.net/posts/2020-06-12-regression.html)
    during this time. While today I might rephrase a few things, it remains one
    of my favorite things that I've written and was very important for
    collecting my thoughts on the subject.

But before any of that, I needed to find a job! About two months into my spell
of unemployment, along came this relatively innocuous tweet:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet lds-dual-ring" data-theme="dark">
  <a href="https://twitter.com/CardColm/status/1273441117107892228"></a> 
</blockquote>

At the time, I didn't even follow Colm on Twitter. There's really not that much
detail in the tweet either. The location and company didn't even make it into
the body, but a follow-up reply hours later. I knew though the reason that I was
seeing this tweet was because of the disproportionate numbers of math professors
that I follow on Twitter, so I took it seriously. I tracked down his contact
info (I recall this being harder than you'd expect of a professor) and sent him
an email the next morning. Within a day I had received a phone call from my
future manager. It was just the foot in the door to a difficult interviewing process,
but even here my online presence was relevant. One of the senior managers (a
math PhD) grilled me over my [post about the Basel
problem](https://chrishenson.net/posts/2020-05-27-basel.html). I later learned
that one of the reasons that I was given an interview in the first place was
because of the Project Euler solutions I had written in Haskell and [written a
blog post about](https://chrishenson.net/posts/2020-07-12-fib_power.html).

I moved to Atlanta to join one of Bank of America's quantitative finance groups,
and quickly realized that Twitter and my tiny blog had opened up a world of
possibility for me. A world where my bonus checks were more money than than my
parents made in a year. A world where most of time I had free reign to pick my
projects, to start initiatives, to write software that touched literal millions
of dollars. And in some sense it was as simple as that, being in the right place
at the right time, with someone willing to give a chance to someone like me that
might as well have been from off the street. An amusing follow up is this
exchange that happened just after I accepted an offer:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet lds-dual-ring" data-theme="dark">
  <a href="https://twitter.com/CardColm/status/1283763996110270464?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw"></a> 
</blockquote>

Over the next few years of working, I stayed "active" on Twitter. I use scare
quotes here because my definition of active is something more akin to what most
people would call lurking. While I loved my time at Bank of America, even from
the onset I knew that I intended to return for my PhD. At the tail end of my
masters I had just discovered functional programming through Haskell,
and slowly my Twitter feed became more and more populated with PL researchers
than math professors. I had very little formal CS education[^fail], and so over
about three years I spent my days writing financial code and my nights and
weekends slowly learning about type systems and proof assistants.

[^fail]: I was a math major as an undergraduate, and distinctly remember the
    pain of taking and nearly failing a C++ class my sophomore year. Not much stuck!

And when it was time to apply to PhD programs, naturally the first place I went
to organize my thoughts was Twitter. If I remember correctly, at one point I
literally went peron by person through my following list to make sure I wasn't
forgetting any potential advisors. In the spirit of Twitter serendipity, I ran
across this tweet:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet lds-dual-ring" data-theme="dark">
  <a href="https://twitter.com/csgordon/status/1587517177179308032"></a> 
</blockquote>

Again, this wasn't a person I was even following. I wasn't familiar with the
professor or their institution, but the content was interesting. I hadn't been
actively searching for something that intersected with linguistics, but I was
curious. I took the time to look through the paper they suggested and found it
interesting. I looked at their website and found a compelling and detailed page
for prospective students that instantly signaled to me that this was someone
that I wanted to work with. And again, Twitter was my foot in the door. Perhaps
not in the same sense as when I was job searching in that any barrier to entry
was removed, but the much more subtle obstacle of opening my eyes to a good
option that I would not have previously known even existed. I again packed up
everything and moved across the country to Philadelphia with Colin as my PhD advisor.

All together, counting my time at Bank of America and the next few years I'll be
working on my PhD, there is a total of almost a decade of major career events
that I can directly attribute to Twitter, and a far more profound impact on my
technical development. And again, I'd like to emphasize that I'm not a big
account. I'm not even a medium sized account! I don't post much, and for the
first few years I didn't even reply to people very often. But just by being in
the right place, surrounding myself with people doing work that I thought was
interesting, all of these options and information revealed themselves to me. I
can't think of a single other resource with more significance to my career
development.
