---
title: A New Site!
---

After several years of procrastination, I have finally moved my blog away from
the bespoke Python setup that I made years ago, long before I knew anything
about functional programming. No guarantee that this means I'll actually start
posting again, but at least things are much nicer now!

I decided to use [Hakyll](https://jaspervdj.be/hakyll/), a static site
generator written in Haskell. The process was pretty painless. The Hakyll
documentation has a large collection of examples that make it pretty quick to
figure things out, and I found several useful blogs along the way.

Aside from cosmetics, I made only a few changes to the default template besides
[enabling MathJax](https://wizzup.github.io/posts/hakyll-mathjax/) and
generating [syntax highlighting using
Pandoc](https://rebeccaskinner.net/posts/2021-01-31-hakyll-syntax-highlighting.html).
The latter was a bit of an annoyance, not because it was difficult to setup,
but because of having Pandoc as a dependency. This precluded me from building
on my DigitalOcean VM that hosts this site, because apparently Pandoc requires
more than the 2GB of memory that I have allocated to build. In general the
dependencies are quite heavy. 

I considered using GitHub Pages with
[haskell-actions](https://github.com/haskell-actions/), which includes some
examples of how to cache dependencies with cabal, or integrating with Nix as
described
[here](https://robertwpearce.com/the-hakyll-nix-template-tutorial.html) and
[here](https://rebeccaskinner.net/posts/2021-06-06-nixifying-a-hakyll-blog.html).
After a good deal of investigation however, I decided against either approach
and just did a manual rsync of the generated files after building locally. I
truly don't think I will become such an avid writer in the foreseeable future
as to make robust CI a necessity.

Anyway, that's it for now. Hopefully this ushers in a new era of me writing
about PL topics!
