---
title: Thirteenth Summer School on Formal Techniques
tags: Conferences, Lean, Python, AI
---

For the last week and a half I've been at the [Thirteenth Summer School on
Formal Techniques](https://fm.csl.sri.com/SSFT24/). It has been a great
experience as a newer PhD student which I would highly recommend to anyone even
tangentially interested in formal methods. This will be a short post just
pointing out a few talks that stood out to me.

Firstly, it was an absolute treat to meet Leonardo de Moura and David Thrane
Christiansen. Leo spoke at some length about the [Lean Focused Research
Organization (FRO)](https://lean-fro.org/), which I think has thoughtfully
assembled a focused [roadmap](https://lean-fro.org/about/roadmap/) that will
provide the language with great inroads towards further usability and longevity.
I was especially pleased to see the documentation tool
[Verso](https://github.com/leanprover/verso) that David is working on. This
tools borrows ideas from [Alectryon](https://github.com/cpitclaudel/alectryon),
allowing you to write literate Lean code that that can be exported into
something like a website or textbook, with the wonderful feature of being able
to see intermediate proof states. While this project is in an early stage, it is
already being used on the [Lean blog](https://lean-lang.org/blog/), and I am
excited to see its continued development.

David also led some practical labs with what I felt was a well-crafted [repo of
exercises](https://github.com/david-christiansen/ssft24). It walks through the
perhaps familiar exercises of verifying optimizations for a small imperative
language embedded in Lean, but with some fun deviations such as using Lean's
metaprogramming to set up quasiquoting and using
[LeanSAT](https://github.com/leanprover/leansat) to automate a long
computational proof. My impression was that David has a keen eye towards
appropriate pedagogy for proof assistant beginners and an infectious sense of
joy found in doing so. I could not imagine another person more well-suited to
work on the documentation goals that the Lean FRO has developed.

We also had a chance to speak with Chris Lattner, know for his work on projects
such as the development of LLVM, Swift, and most recently the [Mojo programming
language](https://github.com/modularml/mojo). If you've not previously heard of
Mojo, it is a programming language that aspires to be a superset of Python with
additional features such as linear types and compilation that is intended to for
instance be well-suited to code running on GPUs, with an eye towards AI
applications. While I am not particularly interested in these applications, I
think any work from a respected compiler developer that aims to bridge the
increasing gap between high-level languages and hardware-aware programming is
worth keeping an eye on.

The last piece of research I'll mention is from [Armando
Solar-Lezama](https://people.csail.mit.edu/asolar/). Again, while I am not
acutely interested in AI or Python, I did find some interest his research that
connects program synthesis with AI. To avoid the risk of poorly explaining
something outside my research area, I'll be brief. The core idea appears to be
first specifying the grammar of a DSL, then treating programs (with a focus on
numeric matrices) as differentiable structures. From there the idea is to first
learn an architecture, then fine tune these architectures with additional
training. As an example, during a lab exercise I was able to find a decent
approximation to a program for simulating a bouncing ball using the newly
released [neurosym-lib](https://github.com/kavigupta/neurosym-lib). While I
retain my healthy skepticism towards AI in formal methods applications, I feel
that this approach of users constraining the type of programs produced is a step
towards the kind of guardrails that would provide me with a bit more comfort.

Thank you to Natarajan Shankar and the many other speakers of the summer school
for putting this together!
